>> Desjardins: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MAY 28:
AS ISIS GAINS GROUND IN SYRIA,
IN IRAQ, GOVERNMENT FORCES TRY
TO RETAKE THE KEY CITY OF
FALLUJAH.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
RURAL AMERICA: FACING A SHORTAGE
OF LAWYERS.
>> SOUTH DAKOTA HAS 66 COUNTIES;
64 OF THEM HAVE COURTHOUSES.
IF THERE'S NO ATTORNEYS, IT'S
THE SAME AS A HOSPITAL WITH NO
NURSES.
NOTHING'S GOING TO HAPPEN.
>> Desjardins: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
LISA DESJARDINS.
>> Desjardins: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IT IS A NIGHT OF TENSE WATCHING
AND WAITING AS WAR WITH THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP APPEARS TO
BE ESCALATING ON TWO FRONTS
TONIGHT-- IN SYRIA AND IN IRAQ.
ISIS MILITANTS ARE ADVANCING IN
SYRIA, IN WHAT THE SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
SAYS IS THE GROUP'S BIGGEST
OFFENSIVE IN TWO YEARS NEAR
SYRIA'S BORDER WITH TURKEY.
ISIS ALSO GAINED GROUND TODAY
NEAR THE NORTHERN SYRIAN CITY OF
ALEPPO, FIGHTING REBEL FORCES
WHO OPPOSE SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
VARIOUS REBEL GROUPS ARE BACKED
BY THE U.S., TURKEY, AND SAUDI
ARABIA.
MORE THAN 160,000 CIVILIANS ARE
REPORTEDLY TRAPPED IN THOSE
TOWNS.
BUT IN IRAQ, ISIS FINDS ITSELF
NOW ON THE DEFENSIVE.
FOR THE SIXTH DAY IN A ROW,
IRAQI GOVERNMENT FORCES, BACKED
BY AMERICAN AIRSTRIKES, BATTLED
ISIS MILITANTS IN AND AROUND
FALLUJAH, WHICH IS LESS THAN 40
MILES FROM BAGHDAD.
THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT INSISTED IT
IS ON THE VERGE OF LAUNCHING A
SWEEPING GROUND CAMPAIGN TO
RETAKE THE CITY.
ISIS SEIZED FALLUJAH TWO YEARS
AGO AND IT REMAINS, AFTER MOSUL,
THE SECOND-BIGGEST IRAQI CITY
STILL UNDER THEIR CONTROL.
MORE THAN 50,000 RESIDENTS ARE
SAID TO BE TRAPPED BY THE
FIGHTING IN THAT CITY.
THE U.S. MILITARY SAID THIS WEEK
THAT AN AIRSTRIKE KILLED THE
COMMANDER OF ISIS FIGHTERS IN
FALLUJAH.
FOR MORE ON THE SITUATION ON THE
GROUND IN IRAQ, I AM JOINED VIA
SKYPE BY "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER MISSY RYAN, WHO IS IN
BAGHDAD.
MISSY, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
LET ME START FIRST BY ASKING
YOU, WHO EXACTLY IS INVOLVED IN
THIS CHARGE TO RETAKE FALLUJAH?
>> THERE IS A WIDE ARRAY OF
GOVERNMENT FORCES AND GOVERNMENT
ALIGNED FORCES TRYING TO RECLAIM
THE CITY OF FALLUJAH, SO IT IS
THE IRAQI POLICE, FEDERAL
POLICE, IT IS THE IRAQI ARMY,
AND THEN IT'S SUNNI TRIBAL
FIGHTERS AND IMPORTANTLY, A WIDE
ARRAY OF SHIITE MILITIA GROUPS.
AND WE'VE COUNTED AT LEAST SEVEN
MILITIA GROUPS THAT ARE TAKING
PART IN THE OPERATION, INCLUDING
SOME GROUPS THE UNITED STATES,
PARTICULARLY DON'T WANT ANYTHING
TO DO WITH, SUCH AS HEZBOLLAH,
WHICH IS CONSIDERED A TERRORIST
GROUP BY THE UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT.
>> Desjardins: IRAQI PRIME
MINISTER HAIDER AL-ABADI, WHO
SORT OF, HELPED PUT THIS
COALITION TOGETHER, SAID ON
NATIONAL TV THIS WEEK THAT IRAQI
FORCES WERE APPROACHING A MOMENT
OF GREAT VICTORY.
HOW IMPORTANT IS THIS FIGHT IN
FALLUJAH FOR HIS SEEMINGLY
FRAGILE IRAQI GOVERNMENT?
>> YES, IT IS A REALLY IMPORTANT
MOMENT FOR ABADI RIGHT NOW.
HE IS IN THE MIDST OF A
POLITICAL CRISIS, AND HE IS
FACING URGENT DEMANDS FOR
REFORM.
HE HAS GOT A SORT OF SHAKY
BASIS ON THE SHIITE COALITION
AND HE REALLY NEEDS A WIN, SO IT
IS AN IMPORTANT MOMENT FOR HIM
AND ALSO AN IMPORTANT MOMENT FOR
THE IRAQI SECURITY FORCES.
WHERE, REMEMBER, TWO YEARS AGO,
THE IRAQI ARMY SUFFERED A
HUMILIATING DEFEAT WHEN THEY
LARGELY COLLAPSED IN NORTHERN
IRAQ AHEAD OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE'S ADVANCE THERE, SO THIS
IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THEM TO
SHOW THAT THEY CAN ACTUALLY GO
INTO A REBEL-HELD CITY AND
DEFEAT THE ISLAMIC STATE.
>> Desjardins: YOU SPOKE TO THE
MAYOR OF FALLUJAH, HOW DESPERATE
ARE THINGS THERE?
>> IT SEEMS LIKE IT IS A VERY
DESPERATE PICTURE THERE.
AS THE ISLAMIC STATE HAVE BEEN
IN CONTROL OF FALLUJAH SINCE
JANUARY 2014 BUT IN RECENT
MONTHS, BECAUSE OF THE SIEGE BY
GOVERNMENT SECURITY FORCES
DESIGNED TO ISOLATE THE CITY,
CONDITIONS, HUMANITARIAN
CONDITIONS, LIVING CONDITIONS
HAVE GOTTEN VERY BAD, SO YOU
HAVE A SHORTAGE OF FOOD, YOU
HAVE A SHORTAGE OF MEDICATION,
THERE HAVE BEEN REPORTS OF
PEOPLE DYING OF HUNGER,
OBVIOUSLY, NOT HAVING ACCESS TO
VITAL MEDICAL CARE.
AND THE ISLAMIC STATE IS
MONOPOLIZING, SORT OF, DICTATING
THE DISTRIBUTION OF WHAT BASIC
GOODS STILL REMAIN.
>> Desjardins: THE U.S. MILITARY
HAS SPENT ABOUT $500 MILLION
TRAINING REBEL GROUPS JUST IN
SYRIA-- IN PART, THAT IS TO TAKE
ON THE ISLAMIC STATE.
HAS THAT INVESTMENT BROUGHT ANY
RESULTS?
>> WELL, IF YOU TALK TO U.S.
MILITARY LEADERS, AND THAT'S
SOMETHING I HAVE BEEN DOING HERE
IN BAGHDAD, THEY WILL SAY "YES,
IT HAS," SO THE NEW PROGRAM
REALLY SEEKS TO STAND UP AN
ADVISORY FORCE THAT CAN IDENTIFY
AND SUPPORT RATHER THAN, YOU
KNOW, TRAIN AND SORT OF BASIC
TRAINING WAY, PULLING PEOPLE OUT
OF SYRIA SO THEY SAY NOW WITH
ABOUT 300 AMERICANS SPECIAL
FORCES IN NORTHEASTERN SYRIA,
THEY HAVE BEEN ABLE TO MAKE SOME
PROGRESS IN IDENTIFYING NOT JUST
KURDISH BUT ALSO ARAB FIGHTERS
AND I THINK WE HAVE TO BE PRETTY
CAUTIOUS ABOUT WHAT WE CONCLUDE
ABOUT THIS PROGRAM SO FAR.
I THINK IT IS PROBABLY TOO EARLY
TO MAKE AN ASSESSMENT, BUT THEY
SAY THEY ARE AT LEAST SORT OF
GETTING A BETTER PICTURE OF THE
BATTLEFIELD AND UNDERSTANDING
WHO ARE POTENTIAL PARTNERS
THERE.
>> MISSY RYAN FROM BAGHDAD IN
THE "WASHINGTON POST," THANK YOU
FOR YOUR REPORTING ON THIS VERY
IMPORTANT TOPIC.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Desjardins: ENCOURAGED BY
WARMER WEATHER AND CALMER
WATERS, THE NUMBER OF MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES TRYING TO GET TO
EUROPE FROM LIBYA IS SURGING,
AND SO IS THE DEATH TOLL.
THE ITALIAN COAST GUARD SAID
TODAY IT HAS RESCUED 1,900
PEOPLE STRANDED IN THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA IN THE PAST
24 HOURS, IN 16 DIFFERENT RESCUE
OPERATIONS.
THIS ITALIAN NAVY VIDEO OF A
RESCUE YESTERDAY SHOWS A SHIP
PLUCKING SOME 135 PEOPLE FROM A
SINKING RUBBER BOAT.
CREWS ALSO RECOVERED THE BODIES
OF 45 PEOPLE WHO DROWNED.
OFFICIALS SAY OVERALL, ABOUT
14,000 MIGRANTS WERE RESCUED
THIS WEEK, BUT THAT MORE THAN A
HUNDRED OTHERS MAY HAVE DROWNED.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
IS STEPPING UP HIS OPPOSITION TO
THE ADVANCED U.S. MISSILE SYSTEM
BEING INSTALLED IN EASTERN
EUROPE, SAYING IT'S A DIRECT
THREAT TO RUSSIA'S SECURITY, AND
NAMING TWO NEARBY COUNTRIES AS
PARTICULAR PROBLEMS.
DURING A TWO-DAY VISIT TO THE
NATO COUNTRY OF GREECE, PUTIN
SUGGESTED THAT POLAND AND
ROMANIA COULD FIND THEMSELVES IN
RUSSIA'S "CROSSHAIRS" FOR
HOSTING THE MISSILE SYSTEM.
PUTIN TOLD REPORTERS IN ATHENS
YESTERDAY, RUSSIA COULD EVEN
TAKE "RETALIATORY MEASURES."
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
SAYS THERE IS "NO PUBLIC HEALTH
JUSTIFICATION" FOR POSTPONING OR
MOVING THIS SUMMER'S OLYMPIC
GAMES FROM RIO DE JANEIRO,
BRAZIL.
THE ZIKA VIRUS OUTBREAK BEGAN IN
BRAZIL LAST YEAR, BUT THE W.H.O.
TODAY REJECTED A PLEA BY 150
HEALTH EXPERTS, WHO ARGUE THAT
THE GAMES RISKED SPEEDING UP THE
SPREAD OF ZIKA GLOBALLY.
THE MOSQUITO-BORNE VIRUS CAN
CAUSE SEVERE BIRTH DEFECTS.
THE W.H.O. SAID THE GAMES WOULD
NOT "SIGNIFICANTLY ALTER" THE
SPREAD OF ZIKA, BUT ADVISED
PREGNANT WOMEN NOT TO TRAVEL TO
RIO.
IN THE RACE FOR THE WHITE HOUSE,
WHILE HILLARY CLINTON IS JUST 73
DELEGATES SHY OF CLINCHING THE
DEMOCRATIC NOMINATION, BERNIE
SANDERS IS NOT GIVING UP.
THE VERMONT SENATOR ASKED THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY TO REMOVE
TWO CLINTON SUPPORTERS,
CONNECTICUT GOVERNOR DAN MOLLOY
AND FORMER CONGRESSMAN BARNEY
FRANK, AS CHAIRMEN OF THE
CONVENTION'S PLATFORM AND RULES
COMMITTEES.
HE ALLEGES THEY WERE BIASED.
BUT TODAY, THE PARTY TOLD
SANDERS, "NO."
THIS AS SANDERS HELD RALLIES IN
THREE CALIFORNIA CITIES TODAY,
HOPING FOR A WIN IN THE STATE'S
JUNE 7 PRIMARY.
CLINTON HAD NO PUBLIC EVENTS.
OUTSIDE A CONVENTION CENTER
RALLY FOR PRESUMPTIVE REPUBLICAN
NOMINEE DONALD TRUMP IN SAN
DIEGO LAST NIGHT, POLICE
ARRESTED 35 ANTI-TRUMP
PROTESTERS WHO SHOUTED AND THREW
TRASH AT TRUMP SUPPORTERS.
HOW WILL DRIVERLESS CARS MAKE
SPLIT SECOND, LIFE AND DEATH
DECISIONS?
READ OUR STORY, AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Desjardins: IN 2012, THE
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION SOUNDED
AN ALARM FOR SMALL TOWNS AND
RURAL AMERICA.
THEY WERE RAPIDLY LOSING
LAWYERS, CAUSING A LEGAL
BACKLOG.
IN FACT, WHILE ALMOST 20% OF
AMERICANS LIVE IN RURAL
COUNTIES, ONLY 2% OF AMERICAN
LAWYERS HAVE PRACTICES THERE.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER WENT TO SOUTH DAKOTA TO
SEE HOW ONE RURAL STATE IS
TRYING TO REVERSE ITS ATTORNEY
DEFICIT.
>> Reporter: ATTORNEY KRISTEN
KOCHEKIAN IS SPENDING HER
MORNING WITH OFFICIALS FROM
DOLAND, SOUTH DAKOTA, DISCUSSING
HOW, LEGALLY, THE RURAL RANCHING
COMMUNITY CAN ADDRESS A LOCAL
RAT INFESTATION AND A DOG THAT
IS CAUSING A NUISANCE AROUND
TOWN.
>> SO, THE ORDINANCES THAT WE
ARE MAINLY SEEING A PROBLEM WITH
IS THAT DOGS ARE NOT TAGGED AS
WELL?
>> Reporter: SUCH LEGAL COUNSEL
IS HARD TO COME BY IN DOLAND AND
THE NINE SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES
IN SPINK COUNTY.
UNTIL LAST YEAR, THERE WERE ONLY
TWO ATTORNEYS WITH PRIVATE
PRACTICES-- SERVING THE COUNTY'S
6,000 RESIDENTS.
>> WE LIKELY HAVE SOME
DILAPIDATED STRUCTURAL
ORDINANCES IN PLACE THAT WE CAN
LOOK AT AS WELL.
>> Reporter: MOST SOUTH DAKOTA
ATTORNEYS LIVE AND WORK IN THE
STATE'S BIGGEST CITIES: SIOUX
FALLS, RAPID CITY, AND ABERDEEN,
OR THE CAPITAL, PIERRE.
WITH TWO-THIRDS OF SOUTH
DAKOTA'S ATTORNEYS CONCENTRATED
IN JUST FOUR CITIES, IT'S
BECOMING INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT
FOR THE STATE'S RURAL RESIDENTS
TO FIND A LAWYER, AND AS OLDER
ATTORNEYS START TO RETIRE, SOME
RURAL COUNTIES ARE BEING LEFT
WITHOUT ANY LAWYERS AT ALL
>> WITH KOCHEKIAN'S ARRIVAL, THE
NUMBER OF ATTORNEYS IN PRIVATE
PRACTICE IN SPINK COUNTY GREW
FROM TWO TO THREE.
>> Reporter: HAD YOU EVER BEEN
TO SOUTH DAKOTA BEFORE?
>> NO, NEVER.
>> Reporter: NEVER?
>> NEVER.
I SAW A COMMERCIAL ON TELEVISION
LATE ONE NIGHT, AND IT LOOKED
BEAUTIFUL, AND I'M NOT AFRAID OF
CHANGE AND OR TRAVEL.
AND I FIGURED, WELL, IF I GET
IN, THEN IT'S MEANT TO BE, AND
IT WORKED OUT.
>> Reporter: IT WASN'T A
COMMERCIAL SHE SAW, BUT A TV
NEWS REPORT ABOUT A FIRST-OF-
ITS-KIND PROGRAM ENTICING YOUNG
ATTORNEYS TO MOVE TO SOUTH
DAKOTA.
A FEW MONTHS LATER, KOCHEKIAN,
HER DOG, AND HER BELONGINGS WERE
EN ROUTE.
FOLLOWING THE DEATH OF HER
MOTHER, SHE DECIDED TO LEAVE HER
FAMILY'S FURNITURE PACKAGING AND
SHIPPING BUSINESS IN NORTH
CAROLINA AND RETURN TO THE LEGAL
PROFESSION.
>> THE POWER OF ATTORNEY IS
WHILE YOU ARE LIVING.
>> Reporter: NOW SHE SPENDS HER
DAYS PIVOTING BETWEEN FAMILY AND
CRIMINAL LAW, MUNICIPAL
DISPUTES, REAL ESTATE
TRANSACTIONS, AND THE SUBJECT OF
THIS MEETING, ESTATE PLANNING.
>> THIS IS WHERE YOU WOULD JUST
APPOINT WHOEVER YOU WANT TO TAKE
OVER YOUR AFFAIRS AND HANDLE THE
ESTATE.
THEY WOULD PAY YOUR BILLS.
>> Reporter: GETTING KRISTEN TO
THIS TABLE MIGHT NOT HAVE BEEN
POSSIBLE WITHOUT THE EFFORTS OF
DAVID GILBERTSON, CHIEF JUSTICE
OF THE STATE'S SUPREME COURT.
>> SOUTH DAKOTA HAS 66 COUNTIES;
64 OF THEM HAVE COURTHOUSES.
THEY ARE NOT GOING TO FUNCTION
WITHOUT ATTORNEYS THERE.
IT'S THE SAME AS A HOSPITAL WITH
NO NURSES: NOTHING'S GOING TO
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: HAVING WITNESSED
THE STRAIN ON COURTS CAUSED BY A
RURAL ATTORNEY SHORTAGE,
GILBERTSON CHAMPIONED A NEW
PROGRAM.
YOU'VE BEEN QUOTED AS SAYING
LARGE POPULATED AREAS ARE
BECOMING ISLANDS OF JUSTICE IN A
RURAL SEA OF JUSTICE DENIED.
HOW IS JUSTICE BEING DENIED IN
RURAL AREAS?
>> YOU OFTENTIMES NEED AN
ATTORNEY IN A CRISIS SITUATION
SOONER RATHER THAN LATER, AND IF
THERE ARE NO ATTORNEYS WITHIN
100 MILES, IT'S SIMPLY NOT
AVAILABLE.
IF LAW ENFORCEMENT NEEDS THE
ADVICE OF A LOCAL PROSECUTOR,
THEY'VE MADE AN ARREST, AND THEY
HAVE TO DECIDE WHAT WAY TO GO
WITH THAT CASE, DO THEY HAVE
ENOUGH EVIDENCE, ONCE AGAIN, IF
A PROSECUTOR DRIVES IN FROM 100
MILES AWAY, IT'S JUSTICE DENIED.
>> Reporter: GILBERTSON, WHO IS
THIS YEAR'S PRESIDENT OF THE
CONFERENCE OF CHIEF JUSTICES,
SAYS VIRTUALLY EVERY STATE HAS
THIS PROBLEM.
>> I MEAN, YOU CAN LOOK AT
GEORGIA, I THINK, OVER 90% OF
THE ATTORNEYS ARE IN ATLANTA.
ARIZONA, SAME THING WITH TUCSON
AND PHOENIX.
TEXAS, VIRTUALLY ALL THE
ATTORNEYS IN TEXAS, THEY SAY,
ARE IN THOSE FOUR URBAN AREAS,
WITH A FEW SPRINKLED OUTSIDE.
YOU NAME A STATE, IT PROBABLY
APPLIES.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES
NEARLY 70% OF ALL AMERICAN
COUNTIES ARE CONSIDERED SMALL
AND ONLY 2% OF AMERICAN LAWYERS
HAVE PRACTICES IN THESE SMALL
COUNTIES.
IN 2013, SOUTH DAKOTA'S STATE
LEGISLATURE APPROVED A $1
MILLION BUDGET FOR A 16-ATTORNEY
PILOT PROGRAM.
HALF THE MONEY CAME FROM STATE
COFFERS; THE OTHER HALF, FROM
PARTICIPATING COUNTIES AND THE
STATE BAR ASSOCIATION.
>> WE WERE ALLOWED FIVE YEARS TO
FILL THE ORIGINAL 16 SLOTS; WE
FILLED THEM IN A LITTLE OVER
TWO.
>> Reporter: THE PROGRAM AIMS TO
ENTICE YOUNG ATTORNEYS TO LIVE
AND WORK IN A RURAL COUNTY IN
SOUTH DAKOTA FOR FIVE YEARS WITH
A CASH STIPEND OF $12,500 A
YEAR.
KOCHECKIAN WAS IN THE FIRST
ROUND OF PLACEMENTS.
>> AND THEY GIVE YOU A LIST OF
AVAILABLE COUNTIES.
AND SO I LOOKED UP A LOT OF
DIFFERENT, YOU KNOW, SCHEMATICS,
WITH WHAT MILEAGE IS FROM
HOSPITALS, FROM LARGER CITIES
FOR SHOPPING.
AND SO I NARROWED IT DOWN.
SPINK COUNTY WAS ABSOLUTELY
PERFECT FOR ME.
>> Reporter: SHE NOW WORKS IN
REDFIELD-- LITERALLY, A ONE
STOPLIGHT TOWN.
POPULATION, A LITTLE OVER 2,000
PEOPLE.
HER OFFICE IS OWNED AND OPERATED
BY PAUL GILLETTE, ONE OF THE TWO
ATTORNEYS IN THE COUNTY BEFORE
SHE ARRIVED.
>> SO SHE CAME TO REDFIELD SIGHT
UNSEEN, WHICH WAS VERY STRANGE
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE, I THOUGHT
BRAVE ON HER PART.
>> Reporter: IN THEORY THERE IS
A LARGE GROUP OF PEOPLE WHO
COULD FOLLOW IN KOCHEKIAN'S
FOOTSTEPS.
ACCORDING TO THE AMERICAN BAR
ASSOCIATION, ALMOST A YEAR AFTER
GRADUATING-- AROUND 30% OF 2015
LAW SCHOOL GRADUATES ARE NOT
WORKING AS FULL TIME LAWYERS.
>> IT'S A BLESSING, ESPECIALLY
TO PEOPLE THAT ARE STRUGGLING,
TRYING TO FIND A JOB OR, YOU
KNOW, STAYING AT THEIR PARENT'S
HOME, BECAUSE THEY HAVEN'T BEEN
ABLE TO FIND THAT GOLDEN RING
POSITION.
I THINK THEY SHOULD TAKE A RISK,
AND I THINK THEY SHOULD
RELOCATE.
AND I THINK THEY SHOULD FORGE
THEIR OWN PATH.
AND I THINK THIS ALLOWS THEM THE
ABILITY TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: YOU ARRIVED IN THE
SUMMER, PASSED THE BAR AND
BASICALLY ARE GOOD TO GO.
ARE YOU MAKING A LIVING AT THIS
POINT?
>> YES.
ABSOLUTELY.
>> THERE ARE COUNTIES THAT ARE
BEGGING FOR ATTORNEYS.
>> Reporter: SUZANNE STARR
ASSISTS WITH THE PLACEMENT OF
THE RURAL ATTORNEYS.
ARE YOU BEING BOMBARDED WITH
APPLICATIONS?
>> WE DO HAVE QUITE A FEW
APPLICATIONS, DEFINITELY.
WE HAVE HAD APPLICANTS FROM
TEXAS, NORTH CAROLINA, OHIO,
L.A.
>> Reporter: BUT THE MAJORITY OF
APPLICANTS ARE FROM SOUTH
DAKOTA.
CONVINCING THEM TO STAY IN THESE
COMMUNITIES SLOWS THE STATE'S
RURAL "BRAIN DRAIN," SAVES
COMMUNITIES MONEY, AND HAS A
MULTIPLIER EFFECT ON THE
ECONOMY.
>> WHEN WE LOOK AT THE OVERALL
PACKAGE, WHAT THIS ATTORNEY WILL
BRING: NOT JUST ACCESS TO
JUSTICE, BUT ALSO THEY'LL BUY A
HOME THERE, THEY'LL PAY REAL
ESTATE TAXES, THEY'LL PAY SALES
TAX ON WHAT THEY GENERATE FOR
INCOME.
AND THEY GENERALLY BRING OTHER
PEOPLE INTO THE COMMUNITY TOO.
>> SO MARTIN, WHAT I'M GOING TO
HAVE YOU DO IS START SIGNING.
>> Reporter: BUSY IS HOW
ATTORNEYS RYAN McKNIGHT AND
BRITTANY KJERSTAD DESCRIBE THEIR
LAW OFFICE IN RURAL PHILIP,
SOUTH DAKOTA, AN AGRICULTURE AND
CATTLE TOWN IN THE STATE'S
WESTERN PRAIRIE.
SOUTH DAKOTA NATIVES, THE COUPLE
MET AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH
DAKOTA SCHOOL OF LAW AND GOT
MARRIED.
AFTER McKNIGHT WAS ACCEPTED INTO
THE RURAL ATTORNEY PROGRAM, THEY
DECIDED TO PLANT STAKES IN
PHILIP, 25 MINUTES FROM
KJERSTAD'S HOMETOWN.
SHE CURRENTLY WORKS AS A STATE'S
ATTORNEY-- THE LOCAL PROSECUTOR.
>> YOU NEVER WOULD EXPECT
THERE'D BE THIS MUCH WORK TO DO
OUT IN RURAL SOUTH DAKOTA.
YOU JUST WOULDN'T EXPECT IT WITH
THE COUNTY AROUND 2,100 PEOPLE.
NO BIG CITY, NOTHING WITHIN 86
MILES OF US.
BUT THAT DRASTICALLY CHANGED
AFTER THE FIRST COUPLE WEEKS.
>> Reporter: WAS THERE ANY
RESENTMENT?
SAYING "LOOK AT THESE YOUNG
PEOPLE, THE STATE, THE COUNTY'S
GOING TO GIVE THEM MONEY TO COME
OUT AND WORK?"
>> THAT WAS OUR BIGGEST FEAR,
WAS LIKE, YOU KNOW, PEOPLE SAY
THESE ARE LAWYERS, WHY ARE WE
GIVING THEM MORE MONEY, YOU
KNOW, JUST BECAUSE OF THAT
STEREOTYPE OF THE LAWYER, YOU
KNOW.
SO IT'S LIKE, DO WE REALLY WANT
TO PAY LAWYERS MORE MONEY FOR
JUST COMING HERE?
I AM THE STATE'S ATTORNEY; IF I
WASN'T HERE, THE COUNTY WOULD
HAVE TO HIRE SOMEONE.
AND THEY'D HAVE TO PAY THEM MORE
TO DRIVE.
AND SO IT JUST MADE SENSE
FINANCIALLY FOR THEM TO DO IT.
>> Reporter: BUT DOES THE
PROGRAM MAKE SENSE FINANCIALLY
FOR THE RURAL ATTORNEYS?
>> I HAVE A REALLY GOOD FRIEND
THAT WORKS FOR THE FEDERAL
PUBLIC DEFENDER'S OFFICE IN
PIERRE NOW.
AND HE TOLD ME THAT HE THINKS
WE'RE DOING A HUGE DISSERVICE TO
ATTORNEYS BY ENCOURAGING THEM TO
COME OUT INTO THE BOONIES.
AND THAT WE'RE SENTENCING THEM
TO A LIFE OF POVERTY AS A RESULT
OF THIS.
I DISAGREE WITH HIM, BUT--
>> Reporter: WHY DOES HE SAY
THAT?
>> WELL, BECAUSE IT'S JUST NOT
AS LUCRATIVE AS IT WOULD BE IF
YOU GO SOMEWHERE AND YOU FIND
YOURSELF IN A NARROWER, MORE
LUCRATIVE FIELD.
>> Reporter: WE SPOKE WITH PAUL
GILLETTE.
HE ACTUALLY CITED A COLLEAGUE OF
HIS IN PIERRE, HE SAID, THERE'S
ALSO A DANGER THAT WE'RE GOING
TO MAKE THESE YOUNG ATTORNEYS
TOO BROAD WITHIN A PROFESSION
THAT ESSENTIALLY KIND OF REWARDS
NICHE PRACTICE.
DO YOU THINK THAT'S FAIR?
>> I WAS A SMALL TOWN ATTORNEY
FOR TEN YEARS.
I ENJOYED THE VARIETY.
AND I THINK, IF YOU TALK TO
SMALL TOWN ATTORNEYS, AND ASK
THEM, "HEY, WHY ARE YOU HERE?"
THEY'LL TELL YOU TWO THINGS.
ONE IS THE LIFESTYLE; THEY
PROBABLY DON'T EVEN BOTHER TO
LOCK THEIR DOORS AT NIGHT.
AND SECONDLY, IT'S THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SEE CLIENTS, FACE
TO FACE, IN A MULTITUDE OF
CONCERNS AND BE ABLE TO HELP
THEM AND HAVE THE SATISFACTION,
"HEY, I JUST HELPED THAT PERSON
SOLVE A PROBLEM."
>> I CAN WORK FROM HOME TOO AND
IF I NEED SOMETHING I CAN JUST
WALK DOWN TO THE OFFICE.
>> Reporter: McKNIGHT AND
KJERSTAD RECENTLY PURCHASED A
HOME AND ARE EXPECTING THEIR
FIRST CHILD.
THEY SAY THEY ARE ON TARGET TO
PAY OFF THEIR LAW SCHOOL DEBTS
WITHIN FOUR YEARS BUT SEE THE
REAL BENEFIT OF RURAL PRACTICE
IN THE WORK LIFE BALANCE.
>> YOU SEE A LOT OF ATTORNEYS
THAT ARE REALLY OVERWORKED, AND
I JUST DIDN'T REALLY WANT THAT,
I GUESS.
>> THAT'S ONE OF THE BIG THINGS
THEY ALWAYS TAUGHT YOU OR TALKED
TO YOU ABOUT IN LAW SCHOOL, WAS
THE FIRST FIVE YEARS OF YOUR
ASSOCIATESHIP AT A BIG FIRM WERE
ALWAYS THE ONES WHERE IT'S THE
HARDEST ON YOU PHYSICALLY,
MENTALLY, YOU PUT A LOT OF TIME
IN.
I'D LIKE A JOB WHERE IT'S
8:00-5:00, DONE, NO WEEKENDS,
AND WORK MYSELF.
>> Reporter: AND LIVE?
>> AND LIVE.
>> Desjardins: WE TURN NOW TO
NEW, POTENTIALLY BREAKTHROUGH
RESEARCH IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
THAT SOME ARE CALLING
"REVOLUTIONARY."
MORE THAN FIVE MILLION AMERICANS
LIVE WITH THE DEGENERATIVE BRAIN
DISEASE THAT ROBS PEOPLE OF
THEIR MEMORY.
IT IS THE SIXTH LEADING CAUSE OF
DEATH IN THE U.S.
A STUDY LED BY HARVARD
UNIVERSITY RESEARCHERS AND
PUBLISHED THIS WEEK IN THE
JOURNAL "SCIENCE TRANSLATIONAL
MEDICINE" SUGGESTS THAT
ALZHEIMER'S COULD STEM FROM THE
BRAIN'S PAST ATTEMPTS TO FIGHT
OFF INFECTIONS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM BOSTON TO
EXPLAIN THESE FINDINGS IS ONE OF
THE STUDY'S AUTHORS, ROB MOIR.
HE'S AN ASSISTANT PROFESSOR IN
NEUROLOGY AT MASSACHUSETTS
GENERAL HOSPITAL, AND HARVARD
MEDICAL SCHOOL.
ROB, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US, DURING A VERY BIG
WEEK FOR YOU AND FOR THOSE
WATCHING ALZHEIMER'S.
TELL US WHAT YOUR RESEARCH
SHOWS.
>> YES.
THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
YES, SO, ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE AND
THE NEURODEGENERATION YOU SEE
WITH IT, IS THOUGHT TO BE CAUSED
BY A LITTLE PROTEIN THAT FORMS
THIS CONCRETE-LIKE SUBSTANCE IN
YOUR BRAIN, CALLED AMYLOID.
AMYLOID, IT TURNS OUT, IS
ACTUALLY AN ANTI-MICROBIAL
PEPTIDE.
THAT IS TO SAY, IT IS A
NATURAL ANTIBIOTIC THAT DEFENDS
AGAINST INFECTION IN THE BRAIN,
AND IF YOU GET A VIRUS OR A
BACTERIA THAT GETS INTO THE
BRAIN, IT RISES TO DO BATTLE
WITH IT, AND BINDS TO IT AND
THEN ENTRAPS IT IN THESE LONG
FIBERS AND EVENTUALLY ENTOMBS IT
FOREVER.
AND AS THEY MOUNT IN NUMBER,
EVENTUALLY THEY START TO BE
TOXIC TO OUR OWN CELLS, AND
THAT LEADS TO THE
NEURODEGENERATION.
SO, THAT IS WHAT IT DOES.
WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
WELL, OUR WORK DOES NOT SAY THIS
DIRECTLY BUT WHAT IT CERTAINLY
IS VERY PROVOCATIVE, IN TERMS OF
SUGGESTING, IS THAT THERE IS AN
INFECTION IN A.D., MAYBE LOW
LEVEL, MAYBE MANY DIFFERENT
PATHOGENS INCREASE INTO THE
BRAIN AND IT HAS TO FORM THIS
AMYLOID AROUND THEM AND THIS IS
WHAT DRIVES THE DISEASE.
>> Desjardins: WHAT DO YOU
THINK, THOUGH, THAT THIS COULD
HOLD PROMISE FOR?
IS IT MORE PROMISING FOR FINDING
A TREATMENT FOR THOSE WHO HAVE
ALZHEIMER'S?
OR IS IT MORE PROMISING FOR
THOSE TO IDENTIFY WHO MIGHT BE
AT RISK, OR BOTH?
>> WELL, IT IS ACTUALLY BOTH.
SO, IF IT DOES TURN OUT TO BE AN
INFECTION, THERE IS A
POSSIBILITY OF TREATING PEOPLE
BEFORE THEY GET A.D. WITH
VACCINES, TO TARGET THOSE
PARTICULAR BUGS SO THAT THE
PATHOGENS DON'T GET A CHANCE TO
INFECT THE BRAIN.
>> Desjardins: ARE THERE SOME
OF US WHO HAVE, NATURALLY, MORE
OF THESE AMYLOIDS, OR MORE OF
THIS DEFENSE SYSTEM THAT KICKS
IN, THAN OTHERS?
COULD THAT HELP EXPLAIN WHY SOME
MIGHT BE MORE PRONE TO
ALZHEIMER'S THAN OTHERS?
I KNOW THAT THERE IS OFTEN TALK
OF A GENETIC LINK AS WELL, TO
ALZHEIMER'S.
>> CERTAINLY, IT IS LIKE ANY
INFLAMMATION RESPONSE.
GENETICS PLAYS A BIG PART, SO
DOES ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS AND
WE ALL HAVE AN AMYLOID IN OUR
BRAINS.
ONCE YOU TURN 40, YOU START TO
DEVELOP THE STUFF, BUT SOME
PEOPLE SEEM TO GET IT MUCH
FASTER.
THAT COULD BE DRIVEN BY THE
GENETICS-- THEY HAVE A HAIR-
TRIGGER WHEN IT COMES TO
IMMUNITY, OR IT COULD BE DRIVEN
BY THE FACT THAT THEY ARE
GETTING MORE PATHOGENS SNEAKING
INTO THEIR BRAIN AND THERE COULD
BE A NUMBER OF REASONS FOR THAT.
>> Desjardins: WELL, WE
DEFINITELY WILL BE PAYING
ATTENTION IN THE MONTHS AND
YEARS AHEAD, TO THIS.
ROB MOIR I KNOW YOUR LAB DID THE
WORK ON THIS, AT HARVARD, AND
MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Desjardins: A NEW ART EXHIBIT
LAUNCHED THIS WEEK IN ITALY WITH
NO AUTHORIZATION OR SUPPORT FROM
THE ARTIST WHOSE WORKS ARE ON
DISPLAY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
HAS MORE.
>> Thompson: THE ARTIST GOES BY
THE NAME "BANKSY," BUT HIS REAL
IDENTITY REMAINS A MYSTERY.
150 PRINTS, PAINTINGS, AND
OBJECTS ATTRIBUTED TO BANKSY ARE
ON DISPLAY IN THIS NEW EXHIBIT
AT THE PALAZZO CIPOLLA MUSEUM,
IN ROME.
IT'S CALLED "WAR, CAPITALISM,
AND LIBERTY," AND ORGANIZERS SAY
IT'S THE LARGEST MUSEUM EXHIBIT
EVER OF BANKSY'S WORK.
BANKSY IS BEST KNOWN FOR HIS
STREET ART-- MURALS AND GRAFFITI
WHICH POP UP BY SURPRISE ALL
OVER THE WORLD, FEATURING
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL COMMENTARY.
HIS WORK HAS CRITICIZED EUROPE'S
HANDLING OF ITS MIGRANT CRISIS.
THIS MURAL AT THE LARGE MIGRANT
CAMP IN CALAIS, FRANCE DEPICTED
APPLE COMPUTER FOUNDER STEVE
JOBS AS A MIGRANT FROM SYRIA.
JOBS' BIOLOGICAL FATHER WAS
SYRIAN.
AFTER POLICE FIRED TEAR-GAS ON
THE CALAIS CAMP, BANSKY PAINTED
THIS WORK ON THE OUTSIDE WALL OF
THE FRENCH EMBASSY IN LONDON,
DEPICTING A CHARACTER FROM THE
MUSICAL "LES MISERABLES" CHOKING
ON TEAR GAS.
THE LEADING THEORY IS THAT
BANSKY IS AN ENGLISHMAN IN HIS
40's FROM THE CITY OF BRISTOL.
BUT THAT HAS NEVER BEEN
CONFIRMED.
ACORIS ANDIPA IS A CURATOR OF
THE NEW EXHIBIT.
>> THERE IS A CERTAIN ROMANCE IN
THE TALE, ISN'T THERE?
THAT THERE IS A SORT OF UNKNOWN
ROBIN HOOD OF THE 21st CENTURY.
I THINK, THAT IN ITSELF, HAS A
CERTAIN ENCHANTMENT ABOUT IT.
>> Thompson: THE EXHIBIT
FEATURES WORKS FROM THE
COLLECTIONS OF PRIVATE
INDIVIDUALS.
THERE ARE CELEBRITY PORTRAITS,
DEPICTIONS OF THE MILITARY AND
PROTESTS, AND SEVERAL RATS, A
SIGNATURE BANKSY IMAGE; AND
COPIES OF ONE OF HIS BEST KNOWN
IMAGES, "GIRL WITH A BALLOON."
THE EXHIBIT WILL BE ON DISPLAY
UNTIL EARLY SEPTEMBER.
>> Desjardins: FINALLY, AMONG
SOME 400 CHILDREN POPE FRANCIS
MET TODAY AT THE VATICAN WERE
MANY MIGRANTS.
CLUTCHING THE LIFE JACKET OF A
DROWNED GIRL, FRANCIS TOLD THEM
MIGRANTS ARE NOT DANGEROUS BUT
IN DANGER.
IN HIS AUDIENCE WAS A NIGERIAN
BOY TAKEN IN BY AN ITALIAN
FAMILY TWO YEARS AGO AFTER THE
BOY'S PARENTS DROWNED.
AND JOIN THE NEWSHOUR'S GWEN
IFILL FOR AN INTERVIEW WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMA, FOLLOWED BY A
TOWN HALL MEETING WHERE HE WILL
TAKE QUESTIONS ON A VARIETY OF
TOPICS.
"QUESTIONS FOR PRESIDENT OBAMA,"
A PBS NEWSHOUR SPECIAL, AIRS
THIS WEDNESDAY AT 8:00 P.M. ON
YOUR PBS STATION.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M LISA DESJARDINS.
GOOD NIGHT.